Add tutorial working with workspaces (#1106)
stellar/stellar-docs: docs/build/guides/conventions/workspace.mdx

---
title: Workspaces
hide_table_of_contents: true
description: Organize contracts using Cargo workspaces
---

> ### Initializing workspace project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Workspace
```

Using Cargo's workspace [feature](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch14-03-cargo-workspaces.html) makes it very convenient to organize your smart contracts in subdirectories of your project's root.

It's very simple to get started using the cli:

```
stellar contract init . --name add_contract
```

> Running this command will create a root project directory (`soroban-project`) and then initialize a project workspace with a single contract named `add_contract`.

Reviewer: > will create a root project directory (`soroban-project`)

I didn't experience this when I run the specific command. For example:

```
CodeExperiments/ws
$ stellar contract init . --name add_contractc
ℹ️ Initializing workspace at "."
➕ Writing "./.gitignore"
➕ Writing "./Cargo.toml"
➕ Writing "./README.md"
ℹ️ Initializing contract at "./contracts/add_contractc"
➕ Writing "./contracts/add_contractc/Cargo.toml"
➕ Writing "./contracts/add_contractc/Makefile"
➕ Writing "./contracts/add_contractc/src/lib.rs"
➕ Writing "./contracts/add_contractc/src/test.rs"

CodeExperiments/ws
$ l
total 24
drwxr-xr-x@  6 leighmcculloch  staff   192B 17 Feb 06:07 .
drwxr-xr-x  13 leighmcculloch  staff   416B 17 Feb 06:07 ..
-rw-r--r--@  1 leighmcculloch  staff    69B 17 Feb 06:07 .gitignore
-rw-r--r--@  1 leighmcculloch  staff   454B 17 Feb 06:07 Cargo.toml
-rw-r--r--@  1 leighmcculloch  staff   976B 17 Feb 06:07 README.md
drwxr-xr-x@  3 leighmcculloch  staff    96B 17 Feb 06:07 contracts
```

Author: Apologies, should've been `stellar contract init soroban-project`

Adding one more contract template to the project can be done using the same command:

```
stellar contract init . --name main_contract
```

The project tree will look like this:

```

> $ tree

Reviewer: The tree command won't work for all users and could be a point of confusion. The main goal of displaying the file hierarchy is to communicate what it is and we can do that without the tree command. Other docs where we display the hierarchy we drop the command.
```suggestion
```

.
├── Cargo.toml
├── contracts
│   ├── add-contract
│   │   ├── Cargo.toml
│   │   ├── Makefile
│   │   └── src
│   │       ├── lib.rs
│   │       └── test.rs
│   └── main-contract
│       ├── Cargo.toml
│       ├── Makefile
│       └── src
│           ├── lib.rs
│           └── test.rs
└── README.md
```

> Running `stellar contract init` command created a sample contracts subdirectories (located in `./contracts), each contains:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running `stellar contract init` command created a new contract, located in `./contracts`, each containing:
```

> 1. Cargo.toml file with all (minimal) necessary dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Cargo.toml file with the `soroban-sdk` dependency
```

> 2. `Makefile` to easily build contract using `make` command

Reviewer: I think we should probably not call attention to this. Here we signal about using the make command for it's ease. Then none of the rest of the guide makes use of it. Given the make command will only be appreciated by a subset of users we probably do not need to dedicate text to it which may be distracting to new devs.
```suggestion
```

> 3. `src` directory with an example hello-world contract and a simple test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. `src` directory with an example hello-world contract and a test.
```

> We can now build our workspace's contracts with
> 
> ```
> stellar contract build
> ```
> 
> command and check the build directory `target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/`

Reviewer: I think we can structure this without breaking the sentence across paragraphs.
````suggestion
Build the contracts with the following command, and check the build directory `target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/` for the compiled `.wasm` files.

```
stellar contract build
```
````

> ### Cross-contract call between workspaces

Reviewer: Suggested different name for this section: 
```suggestion
### Integrating Contracts in the Same Workspace
```

Reviewer: In this specific case, why would a developer not simply import the other contract natively instead of with wasm? The main benefit of importing a wasm is when the source code is not part of the current workspace.

Reviewer: We could add a `:::tip` block with a link across to this tutorial for how to use contractimport in cases when you want to test or integrate against the wasm file instead: https://developers.stellar.org/docs/build/guides/conventions/cross-contract

Author: Updated

With the given project structure, cross-contract calls can be easily made. Starting with modifying the sample hello world contract into an add contract:

```rust title="contracts/add_contract/src/lib.rs"
#![no_std]
use soroban_sdk::{contract, contractimpl};

#[contract]
pub struct ContractAdd;

#[contractimpl]
impl ContractAdd {
    pub fn add(x: u32, y: u32) -> u32 {
        x.checked_add(y).expect("no overflow")
    }
}
```

> The `ContractAdd` can now be referenced and used from another contracts in the same workspace using [`contractimport`](https://docs.rs/soroban-sdk/latest/soroban_sdk/macro.contractimport.html) macros. Note that the `contractimport` requires relative path of the compiled wasm file, so first it's required to recompile the contract with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ContractAdd` can be referenced and used in the tests of other contracts in the same workspace using [`contractimport`](https://docs.rs/soroban-sdk/latest/soroban_sdk/macro.contractimport.html) macros. The `contractimport` requires relative path of the compiled wasm file, so first it's required to recompile the contract with:
```

Author: Deleted this section

```
stellar contract build
```

As seen previously, target wasm file is located in

```

> $PROJECT_ROOT/target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/

Reviewer: We can assume the user is aware of the project root, and avoid the use of the env var they may not have set up:
```suggestion
target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/
```

Author: Deleted this section

```

In order to reference this wasm file from `contracts/main_contract/src/lib.rs`, we need to first construct the path to the project root: `../..` (relative to second contract's Cargo.toml file location) followed by path to the wasm file:

```

> ../../../target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/add_contract.wasm

Reviewer: `../..` or `../../..`?

Author: Deleted this section

```

It can now be used in the rust code:

```rust title="contracts/main_contract/src/lib.rs"
#![no_std]

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

fn test_adding_cross_contract() {
    let env = Env::default();

    // Register add contract using the imported WASM.
    let contract_add_id = env.register_contract_wasm(None, contract_add::WASM);

    // Register main contract defined in this crate.
    let contract_main_id = env.register_contract(None, ContractMain);

    // Create a client for calling main contract.
    let client = ContractMainClient::new(&env, &contract_main_id);

    // Invoke main contract via its client. Main contract will invoke add contract.
    let sum = client.add_with(&contract_add_id, &5, &7);
    assert_eq!(sum, 12);
}
```

Contracts can now be re-complied running the following command from the project root:

```
stellar contract build
```

And check that the test is working correctly, running tests in `contracts/main_contract`:

```
cargo test

running 1 test
test test::test_adding_cross_contract ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.01s
```

Finally, let's deploy this contracts and call our main contract using cli. If you haven't already, set up an account (alice) first

```bash
stellar keys generate alice --fund --network testnet

> STELLAR_SOURCE_ACCOUNT=alice

Reviewer: The account can be set in a way that is platform agnostic using:
```suggestion
stellar keys use alice
```

Author: Good catch, I believe `stellar keys use` wasn't live yet when I wrote this guide

    let sum = client.add_with(&contract_add_id, &5, &7);
    assert_eq!(sum, 12);
}
```

Contracts can now be re-complied running the following command from the project root:

```
stellar contract build
```

And check that the test is working correctly, running tests in `contracts/main_contract`:

```
cargo test

running 1 test
test test::test_adding_cross_contract ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.01s
```

Finally, let's deploy this contracts and call our main contract using cli. If you haven't already, set up an account (alice) first

```bash
stellar keys generate alice --fund --network testnet
STELLAR_SOURCE_ACCOUNT=alice
```

Second is to deploy the contracts:

```bash
ADD_CONTRACT=`stellar contract deploy --network testnet --wasm target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/add_contract.wasm`
MAIN_CONTRACT=`stellar contract deploy --network testnet --wasm target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/main_contract.wasm`
```

This contracts can also be referenced using aliases after running following command:

```bash
stellar contract alias add --id $ADD_CONTRACT add_contract

> stellar contract alias add --id MAIN_CONTRACT main_contract

Reviewer: Instead of adding aliases with a separate command and relying on bash which won't work on Windows, you can configure the deploy to automatically create the alias by using the `--alias` option on the deploy command.

Author: Updated documentation. We should merge https://github.com/stellar/stellar-cli/pull/1765 before this doc is merged

---

> title: Organize contracts with workspace

Reviewer: It's helpful for a reader if titles are brief, because they're displayed in places where a quick glance at a word of two is more accessible to a user.
```suggestion
title: Workspaces
```

hide_table_of_contents: true

> description: Organize your contracts using Cargo workspaces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Organize contracts using Cargo workspaces
```

---

### Initializing workspace project

Using Cargo's workspace [feature](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch14-03-cargo-workspaces.html) makes it very convenient to organize your smart contracts in subdirectories of your project's root.

It's very simple to get started using the cli:

> ```bash
> mkdir soroban-project
> cd soroban-project
> PROJECT_ROOT=.
> stellar contract init . --name add_contract

Reviewer: This code here, and further down seem to be specifically targeting linux/mac, or bash at least. We need these tutorials where possible to get as portable as possible to windows. In some cases we might not be able to do that, but here we should be able to.

The use of the `PROJECT_ROOT=.` is also teaching more than we need to, it's teaching conventions that aren't required for using the tools and we should keep the tutorials as narrowly focused on the required actions as possible.

Suggest changing to:

````suggestion
```
stellar contract init soroban-project --name add_contract
````

For example, the above command will result in the following output and created directory structure:
```console
$ stellar contract init soroban-project --name add_contract
ℹ️ Initializing workspace at "soroban-project"
➕ Writing "soroban-project/.gitignore"
➕ Writing "soroban-project/Cargo.toml"
➕ Writing "soroban-project/README.md"
ℹ️ Initializing contract at "soroban-project/contracts/add_contract"
➕ Writing "soroban-project/contracts/add_contract/Cargo.toml"
➕ Writing "soroban-project/contracts/add_contract/Makefile"
➕ Writing "soroban-project/contracts/add_contract/src/lib.rs"
➕ Writing "soroban-project/contracts/add_contract/src/test.rs"
```

```

Running this command will create a root project directory (`soroban-project`) and then initialize a project workspace with a single contract named `add_contract`.

Adding one more contract template to the project can be done using the same command:

> ```bash

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
````

stellar contract init . --name main_contract
```

The project tree will look like this:

```
$ tree
.
├── Cargo.toml
├── contracts
│   ├── add-contract
│   │   ├── Cargo.toml
│   │   ├── Makefile
│   │   └── src
│   │       ├── lib.rs
│   │       └── test.rs
│   └── main-contract
│       ├── Cargo.toml
│       ├── Makefile
│       └── src
│           ├── lib.rs
│           └── test.rs
└── README.md
```

> Running `contract init` command created a sample contracts subdirectories (located in `./contracts), each contains:

Reviewer: A reader doesn't necessarily read all commands as being a subcommand of the stellar-cli. It's helpful to be explicit.
```suggestion
Running `stellar contract init` command created a sample contracts subdirectories (located in `./contracts), each contains:
```

1. Cargo.toml file with all (minimal) necessary dependencies
2. `Makefile` to easily build contract using `make` command
3. `src` directory with an example hello-world contract and a simple test.

> We can now build our project's contracts with

Reviewer: Use the word workspace when referring to the workspace, because that's the term the Rust community uses, and the term the tooling describes it as.
```suggestion
We can now build our workspace's contracts with
```

```bash
stellar contract build
```

command and check the build directory:

```bash
$ ls target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/ | grep wasm
add_contract.wasm

> main_contract.wasm

Reviewer: Instead of showing these system specific commands, we could refer people to look in the directory, and they can look in the directory however they do on their system.

pub trait Adder {
    fn add(x: u32, y: u32) -> u32;
}

```

```rust
// contracts/add_contract/src/lib.rs
#![no_std]
use soroban_sdk::{contract, contractimpl};
use adder_interface::Adder;

#[contract]
pub struct ContractAdd;

#[contractimpl]
impl Adder for ContractAdd {
    fn add(x: u32, y: u32) -> u32 {
        x.checked_add(y).expect("no overflow")
    }
}

```

```rust
// contracts/main_contract/src/lib.rs
#![no_std]

use soroban_sdk::{contract, contractimpl, Address, Env};
use adder_interface::AdderClient;

#[contract]
pub struct ContractMain;

#[contractimpl]
impl ContractMain {
    pub fn add_with(env: Env, contract: Address, x: u32, y: u32) -> u32 {
        let client = AdderClient::new(&env, &contract);
        client.add(&x, &y)
    }
}

mod test;
```

And update test imports:

```rust
// contracts/main_contract/src/test.rs
#![cfg(test)]

use crate::{ContractMain, ContractMainClient};
use soroban_sdk::Env;

mod contract_add {
    soroban_sdk::contractimport!(
        file = "../../target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/my_contract.wasm"
    );
}
// <...>
```

As the final step we can create an alternative `Adder` implementation that adds an extra 1:

> ```rust
> // contracts/add_extra_contract/src/lib.rs

Reviewer: You can set the title on the code block with:
````suggestion
```rust title="contracts/add_extra_contract/src/lib.rs"
````

#![no_std]
use soroban_sdk::{contract, contractimpl};
use adder_interface::Adder;

#[contract]
pub struct ContractAdd;

#[contractimpl]
impl Adder for ContractAdd {
    fn add(x: u32, y: u32) -> u32 {
        x.checked_add(y).expect("no overflow").checked_add(1).expect("no overflow")
    }
}
```

We can now deploy this contracts and test the new behavior:

```bash
stellar contract build

> ADD_CONTRACT=`stellar contract deploy --network testnet --wasm target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/add_contract.wasm`

Reviewer: Can we use aliases instead of env vars for the contract IDs? That's the convention we've started moving towards now that aliases have been implemented.

Author: I wasn't using aliases because they are not supported in contract calls (see https://github.com/stellar/stellar-cli/issues/1764#issue-2706325385) but I can replace some of env vars with aliases instead

Reviewer: For locations that don't yet surface the alias value we can get it with `stellar contract alias show <ALIAS>` and show people to use that to copy-paste it into the correct location. It's not great, but also this gap in functionality is being fixed now:
- https://github.com/stellar/stellar-cli/pull/1765
